---
title: 'Open Data, Indigenous Knowledge, and Archaeology: The need for community-driven open data projects'
author: 'Kisha Supernant'
date: '2019-04-02'
slug: open-data-supernant
categories:
  - Presentations
tags: [Presentations]
description: ''
featured_image: ''
---

### Dr. Kisha Supernant
#### Department of Anthropology, University of
Alberta

DRAFT: Do not cite in any context without the permission of the author

Introduction:
-------------

With the rise of the digital age, new possibilities for expanding the
accessibility and long-term sustainability of archaeological data have
emerged. A body of literature over the past ten years has contributed to
important debates about the role of digitization of, open access to, and
community engagement with both digitized and born-digital archaeological
data (Beale 2012; Beck and Neylon 2012; Bevan 2012; Costa, et al. 2012;
Huggett 2015; Kansa 2012; Kansa, et al. 2018; Lake 2012; Wells, et al.
2014). Some scholars have noted ethical challenges to open digital
archaeology (Colley 2015; Richardson 2018), including the tension
between a need to protect finite archaeological heritage and the
commitment to make archaeological information available to broader
publics (Beale 2012; Colley 2015; Costa, et al. 2012). In a time where
archaeological data, when made public, can travel through social media
and similar networks beyond the realm of control of archaeologists, new
concerns about who decide which data become open have emerged. In this
paper, I explore the ethical consequences of making data on the pasts of
Indigenous peoples open without their consent. Much of the archaeology
that has and continues to be done on Indigenous pasts is done by
non-Indigenous archaeologists. When archaeological data is made public,
therefore, who decides? And who should? Below, I trace the arguments for
why data should be open, then contextualize them in light of Indigenous
pasts and cultural heritage control in the digital world. Drawing on
both my experience and some projects in related fields such as museums
and archives, I highlight areas where archaeologists need to be
attentive to the sensitives of Indigenous open data and develop
community-driven digital approaches to archaeological curation,
presentation, and data generation.

The Push for Open Data
----------------------

Archaeological data has not traditionally been open to the public,
although archaeologists have been thinking about public engagement and
community outreach for decades. Concerns about looting, black market
dealings, and other sensitivities around the archaeological record has
led to a tendency to keep information protected as part of good
stewardship. However, there has long been a tension between engaging the
public, writ broad, and protecting cultural heritage from destruction.
The rise of the internet and explosion of digital methods for capturing
and presenting archaeological data has opened up new avenues for data
sharing, community-based data generation, engaging with archaeological
interpretations, and making archaeology more accessible (Bevan 2012;
Costa, et al. 2012; Huggett 2015).

Digital archaeology is expansive in its scope, ranging from making
archival site reports available (Kansa, et al. 2018) to generating
archaeological data in collaboration with broader publics (Beale 2012)
to engaging in social media. Typically framed as an overall benefit to
the field, the move toward more open forms of archaeology has been
argued to be a way to subvert traditional power hierarchies (Bevan
2012), increase transparency and accountability (Costa, et al. 2012),
and enhance collaborate on between archaeologists and the public (Beck
and Neylon 2012). Open digital data has been seen as one way to address
the curation crisis, where significant amounts of archaeological
material languish in boxes in inaccessible warehouses (Bawaya 2007;
Kersel 2015). Bringing data into the open has also been argued to
increase replicability of previous work and provide new data sources for
interesting and important research questions (Molloy 2011).

The emphasis placed on the significance of open digital archaeological
data for the field has meant the ethical challenges of this field have
yet to be fully considered. Richardson (2018) notes that while there is
a significant and growing literature on open digital archaeology, the
ethics of the field have not been clearly articulated (see also Colley
2015).

> Our existing ethical codes are based on a universal assumption that
> everyone working in the field of archaeology possesses the same
> cultural experiences and values, and all support the desire to protect
> archaeological material and sites with the ethical stance of the
> professional archaeologist primarily dedicated to the preservation of
> archaeological knowledge above anything else. (Richardson 2018:64).

Some of the unique challenges to bringing data into open, digital
contexts include privacy, access, and control over what happens to
archaeological data when it moves out into broader online engagements
(Richardson 2018). Richardson emphasizes that not only should ethical
standards be considered for those using online platforms and
technologies as source materials, but also “public *participation* in
digital archaeological projects” (2018:65, emphasis in original). How
information gets used, disseminated, and circulated is significantly
different among digital and online platforms, requiring specific
consideration to how narratives, data, and even personal information can
get taken up for unintended and sometimes nefarious purposes (Richardson
2018).

Considering the ethics of the field as a whole is important, but there
is even less consideration of ethical issues around decision-making and
the sharing of online materials from Indigenous contexts by
non-Indigenous researchers. The UK has tended to lead the way in digital
public archaeology, having developed strong community-based
archaeological programs for decades. However, in Britain, most of the
archaeologists are from the same cultural context as the communities of
practice, although there are some existing vectors of inequality,
especially in terms of class. In colonial contexts, most of the
archaeology is done by people who are not Indigenous to these places,
even through the majority of archaeological cultural heritage in these
places is from Indigenous contexts. Whether generating new data using
digital technologies, developing digital curation methods for legacy
collections, or improving database accessibility and usage, the
decisions that are being made about what happens with digital open
archaeology data is being primarily made by non-Indigenous
archaeologists.

Open Data and Indigenous Heritage
---------------------------------

At the heart of open data lies the question of who decides what, in
which ways, and with whom data are shared, generated, analyzed, and
distributed. Archaeologists remain positioned in most ethical codes and
guidelines as the stewards of the past for the good of all, meaning
archaeologists are ultimately responsible for the conservation of
cultural heritage (Archaeology 1996; Association 1997). However, in
places such as North America, Central America, South America, Australia,
and New Zealand, most archaeology takes place on Indigenous histories.
The ethical entanglements about open data in these contexts are complex,
both in terms of data generated from new projects, as well as bringing
archival data online. There are also concerns that differ across local
Indigenous contexts, often in tension with national and international
laws or standards. Separations between tangible and intangible cultural
heritage is often much less distinct in Indigenous contexts than it is
in non-Indigenous contexts (Brown and Nicholas 2012). Therefore, the
types of digital materials being generated and distributed might have
unique ethical concerns. The duplication of an artifact through a
photograph might have different concerns than a 3D model that is open
access and available for printing.

Bringing archaeological data to a broader, more public audience can be
of significant benefit in some cases. For example, tribal offices being
able to access site records associated with their territory can help
them manage their own cultural heritage resources (Kansa, et al. 2018).
However, there is a tension between open access and control of sensitive
information. The argument that open data makes for better archaeology
and is a positive step for archaeologists may not hold in all Indigenous
contexts. First, there can be concerns about how representations of
archaeological materials circulate through digital platforms. Earlier
this year, an article was published in the *International Journal of
Paleopathology* on an analysis of evidence of syphilis from an ancestor
who was looted from an archaeological site in Tennessee and ended up in
a museum collection (Betsinger and Smith 2019). The article included an
image of the ancestor and, when a Forbes piece was published by a
popular \#scicomm writer, the image of the ancestor was attached as it
circulated through various social media platforms. I first encountered
this on Twitter and my immediate question was about who made the
decision to publish these photos (or to even do the analysis). After
some additional digging, I discovered that very little consultation was
done about the analysis or the publication of the article, since the
remains were considered “unaffiliated” under NAGPRA (even though they
were only between 1500-2000 years old). The decision to publish these
images was therefore made by the authors, the peer reviewers, and the
editors of the journal. Photos of Indigenous ancestors have, in some
cultural contexts, the potential to do harm to living descendants. Even
if this was not the case for this ancestor, no one asked whether it was
appropriate to circulate images or to do the analysis that was then made
public and moved through digital circles. This case is just one example
of the types of ethical challenges archaeologists need to be discussing
regarding open data and the impacts of digital technologies.

There are projects which have attempted to address sensitivities around
archival and museum collections (Brown and Nicholas 2012; Christen 2015;
Hennessy, et al. 2013; Lyons, et al. 2016; Muntean, et al. 2015; Rowley
2013). In engaging with communities for digital repatriation and
reciprocal curation of archival materials, Christen notes the inherent
tensions in doing this work in digital spaces:

> The digital terrain poses both possibilities and problems for
> indigenous peoples as they seek to manage, revive, circulate, and
> create new cultural heritage within overlapping colonial/postcolonial
> histories and oftentimes-binary public debates about access in a
> digital age. While digital technologies allow for items to be
> repatriated quickly, circulated widely, and annotated endlessly, these
> same technologies pose challenges to some indigenous communities who
> wish to add their expert voices to public collections and also
> maintain some traditional cultural protocols for the viewing,
> circulation, and reproduction of some materials. (Christen 2011:185)

Although Christen is working in an archival context, very similar
concerns rest at the heart of archaeological collections when they are
digitized, whether documentary or artifact-based.

Indigenous Archaeology and Best Practices for Open Data

Over the past 20 years, significant literature has been devoted to
Indigenous archaeology (e.g., Atalay 2006a; Atalay 2006b; Atalay 2008;
Atalay 2010; Atalay 2012; Colwell-Chanthaphonh, et al. 2010; Gonzalez,
et al. 2006; Martinez 2014; Nicholas 2008; Nicholas 2010; Nicholas and
Andrews 1997; Silliman 2010a; Silliman 2008; Silliman 2010b; Watkins
2005; Zimmerman 2005; Zimmerman 1992; Zimmerman 1996). Much of this
discussion has centered around power, community engagement, and shifting
from doing archaeology *on* Indigenous pasts to archaeology *by, with*
and *for* Indigenous communities. Scholarship on Indigenous archaeology
has included discussions about diverse ways to disseminate information,
but only a few have touched on the ethics of taking archaeological data
produced in these collaborative contexts online. One excellent example
of a community-based project around digital cultural heritage is Lyons
et al.’s (2016) discussion of the co-creation of a virtual museum for
the Sq’ewelts First Nation in British Columbia, where deep history,
including archaeology, was integrated into a long-term perspective on
what it meant to be Sq’ewelts {Lyons et al. 2016:360). The decisions of
what to put in the virtual museum, what names to use, and how to
organize the concepts were all decided in collaboration with the
Sq’ewelts First Nation, where instead of artifacts, the materials were
called “belongings” and specific Halkomelem names were used to refer to
them (Lyons et al. 2016:368). Instead of an online, open access
repository of archaeological data, the museum represents an culturally
appropriate, community-curated portal for both Sq’ewelts and
non-Sq’ewelts people to learn about their history from their belongings,
landscapes, and perspectives.

In my own work with Indigenous communities in Canada, including the
Tsimshian, the Papaschase Cree Nation, and my own community, the Métis
Nation, I have been and continue to be attentive to the needs of the
communities to have say in how the analog and digital data we collect on
archaeological sites is used and circulate. When on site, I do not post
materials from the site on social media without clear consent from the
community to do so, and when I bring students out to site, I remind them
that they need to follow the same practices. I also work with current
students to use archaeological materials and digital mapping techniques
to develop community-based materials that can assist contemporary
communities in the present. Last semester, I worked with my graduate
student, Liam Wadsworth, and Chief Calvin Bruneau of the Papaschase
First Nation to develop an ESRI Storymap that tells the story of the
dispossession of the Papaschase from their reserve in the 19^th^
century. This Storymap (https://arcg.is/CrzvK), which includes
historical and archaeological data, has become a touchstone of sorts, a
way for Papaschase to share their story with diverse audiences.

I am currently in the process of developing a Métis-centered
archaeological data management system and discussing the challenges with
long-term curation of Métis archaeological materials in an environment
where the law requires that I send them to the provincial museum as a
repository where most of them will be placed in boxes in a warehouse
rather than doing the work they need to do in our community. There is
significant interest from the Métis Nation in using the materials of our
past to help youth and those disconnected through processes of
colonization to reconnect with their cultural heritage; however, it must
center Métis ways of knowing and being in the world.

Conclusion: Community-Driven Open Data
--------------------------------------

Ultimately, the decisions about how to take Indigenous archaeological
data online need to be made by Indigenous communities, in collaboration
with archaeologists, data scientists, and digital humanists. There is a
significant opportunity to address long-standing inequities as we move
to greater and greater use of digital tools in archaeology. However, we
need to be attentive that our “new” uses of digital technologies do not
merely reproduce the “old” colonial structures of power, access, and
control of the cultural heritage Indigenous peoples.

Works Cited:
------------

Atalay, Sonya

2006a Decolonizing Archaeology. *American Indian Quarterly*
30(3/4):269-279.

2006b Indigenous Archaeology as Decolonizing Practice. *American Indian
Quarterly* 30(3/4):280-310.

2008 Multivocality and Indigenous Archaeologies. In *Evaluating Multiple
Narratives: Beyond Nationalist, Colonialist, Imperialist Archaeologies*.
J. Habu, C. Fawcett, and J.M. Matsunaga, eds. Pp. 29-44. New York:
Springer.

2010 “Diba Jimooyung ”—Telling Our Story: Colonization and
Decolonization of Archaeological Practice from an Anishinabe
Perspective. In *Handbook of Postcolonial Archaeology.* J. Lydon and
U.Z. Rizvi, eds. Pp. 61-72. London: Routledge.

2012 *Community-Based Archaeology: Research with, by, and for Indigenous
and Local Communities*. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Bawaya, Michael

2007 Curation in crisis. *Science* 317(5841):1025-1026.

Beale, Nicole

2012 How community archaeology can make use of open data to achieve
further its objectives. *World Archaeology* 44(4):612-633.

Beck, Anthony, and Cameron Neylon

2012 A vision for Open Archaeology. *World Archaeology* 44(4):479-497.

Betsinger, Tracy K., and Maria O. Smith

2019 A singular case of advanced caries sicca in a pre-Columbian skull
from East Tennessee. *International Journal of Paleopathology*
24:245-251.

Bevan, Andrew

2012 Value, Authority and the Open Society. Some Implications for
Digital and Online Archaeology. In *Archaeology and Digital
Communication: Towards Strategies of Public Engagement*. C. Bonacchi,
ed. Pp. 1-14. London, UK: Archtype.

Brown, Deidre, and George Nicholas

2012 Protecting indigenous cultural property in the age of digital
democracy: Institutional and communal responses to Canadian First
Nations and Māori heritage concerns. *Journal of Material Culture*
17(3):307-324.

Canadian Archaeological Association

1997 Statement of principles for ethical conduct pertaining to
Aboriginal peoples. *Canadian Journal of Archaeology* 21(1):5-8.

Christen, Kimberly

2011 Opening archives: Respectful repatriation. *The American Archivist*
74(1):185-210.

2015 Tribal Archives, Traditional Knowledge, and Local Contexts: Why the
“s” Matters. *Journal of Western Archives* 6(1):1-19.

Colley, Sarah

2015 Ethics and Digital Heritage. In *The Ethics of Cultural Heritage*.
T. Ireland and J. Schofield, eds. Pp. 13-32. New York, NY: Springer New
York.

Colwell-Chanthaphonh, Chip, et al.

2010 The premise and promise of indigenous archaeology. *American
Antiquity* 75:228(11).

Costa, S, et al.

2012 Defining and advocating Open Data in archaeology. *Archaeology in
the Digital Era: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Conference of Computer
Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology* (CAA), University
of Southampton, 2012, pp. 449-456. Amsterdam University Press:
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Gonzalez, Sara L., et al.

2006 Archaeology for the Seventh Generation. *American Indian Quarterly*
30:388--415.

Hennessy, Kate, et al.

2013 The Inuvialuit Living History Project: Digital Return as the
Forging of Relationships Between Institutions, People, and Data. *Museum
Anthropology Review* 7(1-2):44-73.

Huggett, Jeremy

2015 Digital Haystacks: Open Data and the Transformation of
Archaeological Knowledge. In *Open Source Archaeology.* Pp. 6-29:
Sciendo Migration.

Kansa, Eric

2012 Openness and archaeology's information ecosystem. *World
Archaeology* 44(4):498-520.

Kansa, Eric C., et al.

2018 The Digital Index of North American Archaeology: networking
government data to navigate an uncertain future for the past.
*Antiquity* 92(362):490-506.

Kersel, Morag M.

2015 STORAGE WARS: Solving the Archaeological Curation Crisis? *Journal
of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology & Heritage Studies* 3(1):42-54.

Lake, Mark

2012 Open archaeology. *World Archaeology* 44(4):471-478.

Lyons, Natasha, et al.

2016 Sharing deep history as digital knowledge: An ontology of the
Sq’ewlets website project. *Journal of Social Archaeology*
16(3):359-384.

Martinez, Desireé Reneé

2014 Indigenous Archaeologies. In *Encyclopedia of Global Archaeology*.
C. Smith, ed. Pp. 3772-3777. New York, NY: Springer New York.

Molloy, Jennifer C.

2011 The Open Knowledge Foundation: Open Data Means Better Science.
*PLOS Biology* 9(12):e1001195.

Muntean, Reese, et al.

2015 ʔeləw̓k̓ʷ–Belongings: Tangible Interactions with Intangible
Heritage*. Journal of Science and Technology of the Arts* 7(2):59-69.

Nicholas, George P.

2008 Melding science and community values: Indigenous archaeology
programs and the negotiation of cultural difference. In *Collaboration
at the Trowel’s Edge: Teaching and learning in indigenous archaeology*.
S.W. Silliman, ed. Pp. 228-249. Tuscon, AZ: University of Arizona Press.

2010 Seeking the end of indigenous archaeology. In *Bridging the Divide:
Indigenous Communities and Archaeology into the 21st Century*. C.
Phillips and H. Allen, eds. Pp. 233-252. London: Routledge.

Nicholas, George P., and Thomas D. Andrews

1997 Indigenous Archaeology in the Postmodern World. In *At a
Crossroads: Archaeology and First Peoples in Canada*. G.P. Nicholas and
T.D. Andrews, eds. Pp. 1-18. Burnaby, BC: SFU Press.

Richardson, Lorna-Jane

2018 Ethical Challenges in Digital Public Archaeology. *Journal of
Computer Applications in Archaeology* 1(1):64-73.

Rowley, Susan

2013 The reciprocal research network: The development process. *Museum
Anthropology Review* 7(1-2):22-43.

Silliman, Steven W.

2008 Collaborating at the trowel's edge: teaching and learning in
indigenous archaeology. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Prress

2010a Indigenous traces in colonial spaces Archaeologies of ambiguity,
origin, and practice. Journal of Social Archaeology 10:28--58.

2010b The value and diversity of indigenous archaeology: a response to
McGhee. *American Antiquity* 75:217(4).

Society for American Archaeology

1996 Principles of Archaeological Ethics.

Watkins, Joe

2005 Through wary eyes: Indigenous perspectives on archaeology. Annual
Review of Anthropology 34:429-449.

Wells, Joshua J., et al.

2014 Web-based discovery and integration of archaeological historic
properties inventory data: The Digital Index of North American
Archaeology (DINAA). L*iterary & Linguistic Computing* 29(3):349-360.

Zimmerman, Larry J.

1992 Archaeology, reburial, and the tactics of a discipline's
self-delusion. *American Indian Culture and Research Journal*
16(2):37-56.

2005 First, be humble: Working with Indigenous peoples and other
descendant communities. In *Indigenous Archaeologies: Decolonizing
Theory and Practice*., C. Smith and H.M. Wobst, eds. Pp. 301-314.
London: Routledge.