---
title: 'Negotiating Complexity in the Management of Sensitive Digital Data'
author: 'David Gadsby'
date: '2019-03-31'
slug: complexity-gadsby
categories:
  - Presentation
tags: [Presentations]
description: ''
featured_image: ''
---


### David Gadsby  
#### National Park Service

Appropriate stewardship of sensitive archeological data necessarily
involves overlapping and intertwined authorities, systems, and
institutions.  The authorities, in turn have different limits and
requirements, while various entities have divergent purposes, needs, and
protocols. Archeologists, librarians, data managers, planners, and
resource managers who work with sensitive data require a thorough
understanding of the nature of both the physical and digital resources
and the contexts in which they are embedded. Healthy institutional
relationships and the effective communication that comes with those
relationships are as critical to ensuring appropriate access to data as
they are to protecting them from unwanted disclosure. Legacy data
present a particular challenge, especially when methods for their
appropriate disposition are ambiguous.  I describe some of the
complexities of managing these data, and examine practices and
procedures for the stewardship of older data and examine some
consequences of inappropriate disclosure.

In my work as national inventory coordinator for the NPS’s Archeology
Program, I’ve been forced to adjust my orientation with regard to
openness about archaeological data. Before I was a data manager, much of
my career was devoted to publicly funded and publicly interpreted
archaeological work. While I haven’t changed my attitude about the
importance of serving the public or of interpreting archaeological work
as a service to the data and the discipline, I’ve had to adjust the
stance of radical openness and engagement that I developed as a graduate
student.

In an essay I wrote with Robert Chidester and Joe Flatman in 2009,
(shortly after joining the NPS), I expressed the opinion that we could
address most heritage problems in the U.S. through engagement and public
education (Flatman, et al. 2012: 65 – 77). In the decade since writing
that piece, I’ve come to recognize that uncritical openness can
ultimately damage sites, and that the conditions under which
archaeological information can be released are highly context dependent,
and require the careful work of knowledgeable specialists. New
technologies that enable mapping and sharing can make this work both
easier –security measures can be built directly into applications and
metadata – and more difficult – electronic media are much easier to
share and spread more rapidly than they did when my career began.

With my research partner (Chidester), I completed my graduate research
in Hampden, a gentrifying working class neighborhood in North-Central
Baltimore. Bob and I were interested in using archaeology to foster a
genuinely open dialogue about class history and public heritage in a
neighborhood that was undergoing rapid social change (Gadsby and
Chidester 2009). We spent a lot of effort trying to capture public
interest, and we had very little interest in keeping site locations
secure – virtually every place in the neighborhood was part of an
archaeological site, and the greatest security danger was to our
equipment (we once had a camera snatched by a tour participant during
the tour) rather than to the sites themselves. Hampden sites were safe
because they were in plain sight and they were relatively recent
historic sites. We never felt that it was important to take
extraordinary measures to protect site locations because the locations
were in the middle of an urban space and most people in the community
knew where we were working and what we were up to. The sensitivity of
the site location information (or rather the lack thereof) was
determined by the social and physical conditions of the research
environment.

As a steward of archaeological site information for the NPS, I find
myself in an entirely different situation; a substantial body of law,
regulation, and NPS policy[^1] – including but not limited to the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)[^2] and Archaeological
Resources Protection Act (ARPA)[^3] -- condition how my colleagues and I
deal with data that we generate and curate in the name of the public and
with the public trust. NHPA charges the NPS with taking inventory of the
historic properties, including more than 80,000 archeological sites on
its more than 85 million acres in every state, the District of Columbia,
some territories. That inventory is a dataset that includes sensitive
information. Fortunately, NPS sites, which lie on NPS lands, are
protected from release under ARPA which even prevents release of
sensitive information even under FOIA (Hitchcock 2006:469).

These various guideposts contain multiple requirements and prohibitions
that stack and overlap in some places, and leave gaps in others. For
instance, the language of NHPA *requires* Federal agency officials and
others to withhold sensitive information under specific circumstances,
while ARPA *prohibits* disclosure of information concerning the nature
and location of protected archeological resources on Federal and Tribal
lands under nearly all circumstances, but ARPA only applies to resources
older than 99 years. ARPA has a definitive FOIA exemption, while section
304 is broader. ARPA applies only to archeological sites on Federal or
Tribal lands, while NHPA, of course, applies to historic properties
regardless of their location. Statute generally prevents the release of
sensitive information, but not always, and the circumstances of release
depend a great deal on the specific situation and location of the site
or property under discussion. There will always be data that slip
through the cracks, and the cracks, as I’ll explain, can be pretty
large.

In general, U.S. government policy and statute directs openness;
although ARPA and NHPA require some secrecy, and NPS policy follows ARPA
and NHPA. In addition to these legal requirements, we may also have
agreements with interested parties (such as tribes and SHPOs) that
further our ability to share information.

In the NPS, we sometimes hear expressions of frustration from our
colleagues from other disciplines, particularly in planning and disaster
response. They want to know why we can’t just open the data. It would
help with planning and compliance. (It might.) Don’t we want to be
included? (We do.) Other disciplines aren’t nearly so cagey about their
sensitive data (some are). Isn’t the trend in government toward openness
and transparency? The data aren’t, after all, classified.

Despite these protests, the unrestricted release of site locations would
be against the law for reasons I’ve outlined above. Also, in the NPS
operating context, it would be very foolish. The consequences of a
serious release of sensitive site location data can mean terrible damage
or even total destruction of an archeological site. Looters are
organized and relentless. They can be very sophisticated, and they can
come from within the ranks of the agency and even from law enforcement.
For example, an archeologist colleague --now the superintendent of a
Civil War park -- recalls an incident in which a park’s law enforcement
officer brought a friend to “relic hunt” at a site after seeing
archeologists working there, digging dozens of holes, and damaging
buried features. The damage to the looted features impacted the site’s
integrity, requiring additional fieldwork to re-establish it (Bies *Pers
Comm.* 3/28/2018). A search of the NPS Archeological Sites Management
Inventory System (ASMIS) reveals more than 8,000 recorded incidents of
looting, vandalism, and unauthorized collection on the approximately
80,000 sites in inventory. This is almost certainly just a drop in the
bucket.

Site looting and vandalism damage archaeological resources, reducing
their integrity and destroying information about the past. But the
consequences can reach well beyond the site level. Scholars of heritage
looting are beginning document the ways illicit trafficking in looted or
stolen antiquities, a practice tied to a widespread international black
and gray markets (per Mackenzie and Yates 2017) is also related to other
crimes – such as drug and human trafficking-- and often has both
legitimate and illegitimate international components. Objects of
cultural and spiritual importance to American Indian tribes, many looted
or collected before the advent of heritage protection laws find their
way frequently to auction in Paris (General Accounting Office 2018).
We’ve also seen in recent decades, several famous examples in which
heritage site destruction – at Bamyan, Nimrud, and Aleppo, for example
-- can be employed as a tool or weapon in international conflicts, while
portable antiquities from those sites appear for sale (Levinthal *et
al.* 2014, Turku 2018). At the same time, organizations like the US.
Committee of the Blue Shield work to protect cultural heritage from
destruction by the military by gathering and sharing information on
heritage sites on “no-strike” lists (USCB 2019).

Part of my point here is this: just as is true in the practice of
archeological interpretation, for the purposes of understanding how to
handle sensitive archaeological information, context is everything, and
understanding context means applying skillful critical thinking. The
consequences of unauthorized release of information vary in scale and
impact from situation to situation. We can’t necessarily build security
protocols that will solve the problem. Some openness seems to work
better in non-US contexts than we could expect it to in the United
States. For instance, the Scottish Coastal Heritage and the Problem of
Erosion (SCAPE) project is able to use crowd sourced information and
publicly available GIS mapping to understand the condition of
archeological sites along the Scottish coast in a way that is virtually
unthinkable in the United States. (SCAPE Trust 2019 a, b).

There are allies that we want to share information with, but need to be
cognizant that the sharing is warranted, and is ultimately safe for
sites. The United States has a tradition of avocational archaeologists
that goes back to the roots of the discipline, but as archaeology has
professionalized, we have increasingly required a lot of training for
non-professionals who wish to participate in archaeological work or to
have access to site locations. Examples include the Archeological
Society of Maryland’s Certified Archeological Technician (CAT) program
and the Site Stewards Foundation’s Site Stewards program in several
South Western states, both of which require significant training in
archaeological technique, knowledge, and ethics (Archaeological Society
of Maryland 2019, Site Stewards Foundation 2019). NPS relies to some
degree on non-professionals who work in parks to monitor sites for signs
of deterioration or looting, but that reliance is limited to a few
programs like the Midwest Archeological Center (MWAC)’s ranger
monitoring program.

Agreement amongst archaeologists is high that unauthorized disclosure of
sensitive information poses a risk to resources (Frank et al 2015: 8).
Indeed, the SAA code of ethics requires archeologists to consider the
protection of sites when publishing and distributing information about
them (Society for American Archeology 2019; Lynott 1997). My sense is
that most of us understand all of this at an almost instinctual level;
it is part of our disciplinary DNA. The risk of archaeologists
intentionally releasing data that should be kept secret is relatively
low. Complications arise when our sensitive data moves outside of the
cultural resource domain and into other domains (GIS, Planning,
engineering, libraries and archives), where considerations and
sensibilities of the practitioners are different. We also see problems
arise with older materials that, while still sensitive, were generated
with less consideration for their confidentiality. There are analogs for
this situation in other disciplines – (Frank et al. point to personally
identifiable information (PII) in public health and other social
sciences) and those disciplines have begun to develop best practices for
dealing with this information (e.g. Zandbergen 2016)

The success, however, of protocols or best practices, depends on the
presence of trained professionals to enforce them. In the NPS, we’re
seeing a decrease in specialists of all kinds, as the service moves
toward a model that uses more generalized resource managers rather than
specialists with particular knowledge about archeological resources.
Human Resources reports from 2016 and 2018 show a 6% decline in the
NPS’s archeological workforce in just two years. While that’s not a
precipitous decline, it is one that, if sustained, will certainly
deliver a blow to the service’s capacity to protect archeological sites.

Institutions like the NPS need trained professionals to ensure that our
data curation practices foster resource protection, while allowing for
preservation planning, and fulfilling as much as possible our mandates
to be open with data. The nature of our resources also make it necessary
that we pay attention to problems of consultation and ownership. Tribes,
SHPOs, and other federal agencies expect us to protect data in which
they may claim (rightfully or not) to possess a proprietary interest. So
we have a need to withhold sensitive data in most cases from most
people, but there are also important instances where sharing data with
appropriate consumers can, of course also protect sites.

As I’ve said, the consequences of inappropriate sharing or release are
high, particularly for NPS and USG, and need to be careful about
balancing the need to interpret our work (which is, of course, very
important) with the need to protect resources Consequences include, but
probably are not limited to:

1)  Violating the law, including the statutes above, as well as a series
    of NPS policies;

2)  Impinging on the protection of/enabling damage to protected
    resources by exposing them to looting and vandalism; and therefore

3)  Damaging to the scientific/archaeological value of sites;

4)  Enabling the sale of looted antiquities through legitimate or
    illegitimate sources; and finally

5)  Causing or compounding real pain and trauma to communities that lose
    heritage (e.g. Phippen 2016, Weston 2016). Archeological sites are,
    in many cases, a source of cultural identity and memory, and
    attacking them is a real attack on culture. GAO identified 15 Paris
    auctions since 2012 of Native American archaeological or
    ethnographic materials (GAO 2018:7). The impacts of these auctions
    on tribes and their members continues to be documented.[^4]

On the other hand, the consequences of sharing too little can include
the inadvertent destruction of sites by development activities, but can
also cause archeologists to appear to be hoarding information and acting
in bad faith.

As a profession, we need to think carefully about why we collect and
preserve sensitive digital data. Is it in the appropriate environment?
Is it in the appropriate format? Is it clearly labelled as sensitive, so
that a non-specialist will know that it is not for public release?

I think we are all aware of the possibility that bad actors might gain
access to sensitive data and share it for the purpose of damaging sites
and committing illegal acts. Take for instance, a 2015 thread from on
the looter chat board Treasure Hunter, which shares coordinates for more
than a dozen submerged archeological sites and offers willing “treasure
hunters” the opportunity to pay a known treasure hunter \$1000 to “work”
these cultural resources. (Treasure Hunter2015).

Bad actors with access to site locations can certainly present a
problem. Also problematic, however, are those with good intentions but
imperfect knowledge of the sensitive nature of archeological resources
and data, and circumstances in which such people gain control of
archeological data may constitute unforeseen weaknesses in the loose
system that controls archaeological information. These instances are a
bit more complex with regard to controlling sensitive information.
Recently, several NPS archeologists discovered that our online technical
library had released a new public-facing website that exposed several
un-redacted survey and overview and identification reports. The ensuing
conversations with the administrators of that website revealed that 1)
they didn’t believe they had done anything wrong, and in fact believed
that they were fulfilling government mandates for transparency, 2) they
had not communicated with ANY archeologists or cultural resources prior
to releasing the data, and 3) they believed they had fulfilled their due
diligence prior to releasing the information by performing internet
searches. When archaeologists reviewed the website, they found several
documents, in particular older survey reports, that were not appropriate
for public sharing. The archivists took them down, but by then, of
course, the cat was out of the bag. The administrators did agree, after
intense discussion, to contact the chief archaeologist before releasing
any more documents that might contain sensitive data, and to remove the
ones identified by archaeologists as inappropriate.

Archeologists need to educate people who deal with our data, such as
librarians, information resource specialists, and GIS specialists about
the established norms, rules, and laws that protect our discipline’s
sensitive data. These people are educable; but we’ve also encountered
circumstances where apparently intelligent people who seem to have good
intentions repeatedly gain control of and share sensitive data. For
instance, a former NPS historian (Butowsky 2019) on an apparent mission
to share as many NPS documents as possible has placed numerous sensitive
documents on the web, despite numerous requests that he not do so. While
he sometimes asks permission from park personnel before posting
documents, our shrinking archaeological workforce means that when he
reaches out to parks to request their data, he may wind up contacting a
non-specialist who won’t understand or respect the need to keep
sensitive data private.

I use these examples to illustrate that sensitive archaeological data
released carelessly but with good intentions can be used by those with
bad intentions. Particularly vulnerable are older (pre-digital) datasets
that may be published in gray literature and lack such safeguards. We
can certainly continue to build safeguards for our digital data as our
colleagues in other disciplines have done for some time (e.g. Zandbergen
2014) , but non-digital legacy datasets in archives or office drawers
often don’t have the same safeguards. There aren’t any pat solutions in
in such cases. Archeologists need to be vigilant for improper releases
of data, but we also have an opportunity to reach out to others who may
have access to our data and educate them on the real-world consequences
of such releases.

**References:**

Archaeological Society of Maryland  
2019 *Certified Archeological Technician Program*
<http://marylandarcheology.org/CATprogram.html> (Accessed 25 March)

Bies, Brandon  
2019 *Personal Communication*. April 28, 2019.

Butowsky, Harry A. and Randall D Payne  
2019 Cultural Resources: Anthropology/Archeology.
<http://npshistory.com/cultural_resources.htm#anthro-archeo> Accessed
3/25/2019.

Chidester, Robert C. and David Gadsby  
2009 One Neighborhood, Two Communities: The Public Archaeology of Class
in a Gentrifying Urban Neighborhood
*International Labor and Working-Class History* No. 76:3 (127–146)
<https://www.academia.edu/539716/One_Neighborhood_Two_Communities_The_Public_Archaeology_of_Class_in_a_Gentrifying_Urban_Neighborhood>.
Accessed 3/27/2019.

Flatman, Joe, Robert Chidester, and David Gadsby  
2012 What Public Engagement in Archaeology Really Means. In *Archaeology
in Society: Its Relevance in the Modern World,* Marcy Rockman and Joe
Flatman (eds). Springer, New York.

Frank, Rebecca, Adam Kreisberg, Elizabeth Yakel, and Ixchel M. Faniel  
2015 Looting Hoards of Gold and Poaching Spotted Owls: Data
Confidentiality Among Archaeologists & Zoologists
[https://www.asist.org/files/meetings/am15/proceedings/openpage15.html
accessed
3/22/2019](https://www.asist.org/files/meetings/am15/proceedings/openpage15.html%20accessed%203/22/2019).

General Accounting Office  
2018 *NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL PROPERTY Additional Agency Actions Needed
to Assist Tribes with Repatriating Items from Overseas Auctions*
<https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-18-537>, Accessed May 25, 2019

Hitchcock, Ann  
2006 FOIA and Protecting Cultural Resources People, Places, and Parks.
*Proceedings of the 2005 George Wright Society Conference on Parks,
Protected Areas, and Cultural Sites.* David Harmon (ed). Pp. 468 – 474.
[http://www.georgewright.org/0581hitchcock.pdf](http://www.georgewright.org/0581hitchcock.pdf%20)
accessed 3/25/2019.

Levinthal, Richard, Brian I. Daniels, Corine Wegener, and Susan Wolfenbarger  
2014 *Ancient History, Modern Destruction Assessing the Status of Syria’s World Heritage Sites Using High-Resolution Satellite Imagery*. American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Washington, DC. [http://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/content\_files/AAAS-SyrianTWHS-122014.pdf Accessed 3/28/2019](http://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/content_files/AAAS-SyrianTWHS-122014.pdf%20Accessed%203/28/2019). 

Lynott, M. J.  
1997. Ethical principles and archaeological practice: development of an
ethics policy. *American Antiquity*, 589–599.

Mackenzie, Simon and Donna Yates  
2017 What Is Grey about the “Grey Market” in Antiquities?
In *The architecture of illegal markets : towards an economic sociology
of illegality in the economy*. Jens Beckert and Matias Dewey eds. Oxford
University Press, New York.

Phippen, J. Weston  
2016 The Auction of Native American Artifacts, *The
Atlantic* MAY 27, 2016
<https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2016/05/native-american-auction/484316/>
accesssed 3/25/2019.

Society for American Archaeology  
1996 Principles of Archaeological Ethics.
<https://www.saa.org/career-practice/ethics-in-professional-archaeology>
Accessed 3/28/2019

Site Stewards Foundation  
2019 *Site Stewards Foundation*
<http://www.sitestewardfoundation.org/index.php> Accessed 3/28/2019.

SCAPE Trust  
2019a Scotland’s Coastal Heritage At Risk <http://www.scharp.co.uk/>
accessed 3/25/2019

2019b Sites at Risk (map)  
<http://www.scharp.co.uk/sites-at-risk/#zoom=6&lat=8089114.80835&lon=-350045.02884&layers=B00000FT>
accessed 3/25/2019

TreasureHunter  
2015 [**1715 Treasure Fleet GPS
Cordinates**](http://www.treasurenet.com/forums/beach-shallow-water/399418-1715-treasure-fleet-gps-cordinates-2.html)
Online discussion board:
<http://www.treasurenet.com/forums/beach-shallow-water/399418-1715-treasure-fleet-gps-cordinates-2.html>.
Accessed 3/25/2019.

United States Committee of the Blue Shield (USCBS)  
2019 *Cultural Heritage Inventories and No-Strike Lists.*
<https://uscbs.org/cultural-heritage-inventories.html> Accessed
3/28/2019.

Zandbergen P. A.  
2014 Ensuring Confidentiality of Geocoded Health Data: Assessing
Geographic Masking Strategies for Individual-Level Data. *Advances in
medicine*, *2014*, 567049.
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4590956/>

Zellmer, Linda R.   
2017 Protected Places: A Survey of Laws on Archaeological Site and Cave
Location Confidentiality and Their Potential Impact on Library Reference
Policies and Services. *Journal of Map & Geography
Libraries*, 13:2, 148-174, DOI: [10.1080/15420353.2016.1249446](https://doi.org/10.1080/15420353.2016.1249446)

[^1]: Including NPS [Director’s Order
    28a](https://www.nps.gov/policy/dorders/dorder28a.html) and [2006
    Management
    Policies](https://www.nps.gov/training/nrs/references/references_policies.html)

[^2]: NHPA Section 304 ([**54 USC 307103 et
    seq**](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title54-subtitle3&saved=%7CKHRpdGxlOjU0IHNlY3Rpb246MzAwMTAxIGVkaXRpb246cHJlbGltKSBPUiAoZ3JhbnVsZWlkOlVTQy1wcmVsaW0tdGl0bGU1NC1zZWN0aW9uMzAwMTAxKQ%3D%3D%7CdHJlZXNvcnQ%3D%7C%7C0%7Cfalse%7Cprelim&edition=prelim),
    *Protection of Historic Properties,* at 36 CFR 800.11 (c)(1)

[^3]: ARPA Section 9 [16 USC
    470hh](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/16/470hh),
    *Protection of Archaeological Resources* at [43 CFR
    7.18](https://www.nps.gov/history/local-law/43cfr7.htm)

[^4]: An auction of *[Arts premiers - Art Precolombien et
    Amerindien](http://www.auctioneve.com/html/infos.jsp?id=95030)*,
    **originally scheduled for early April 2019 - the day of our session
    - appears to have been rescheduled for June 6. The catalog has not
    yet been published.